Welcome back.
In this video, we will provide you
a quick summary of the main points from
our last course on big data modeling and
management.
If you had just completed our second
course and do not need a refresher,
you may now skip to the next lecture.
After this video, you will be able
to recall why big data modeling and
management is essential in preparing
to gain insights from your data,
summarize different kids of data models.
Describe streaming data and the different challenges
it presents, and explain the differences
between a database management system and
a big data management system.
In the second course, we described
a data model as a specification
that precisely characterizes
the structure of the data,
the operations on the data, and
the constraints that may apply on data.
For example, a data model may state that
a data is structured like
a two-dimensional array or a matrix.
For this structure,
one may have a data access operation,
which given an index of the array,
we use the cell of the array to refer to.
A data model may also specify
constraints on the data.
For example, while a total
data set may have many arrays,
the name of each array must be unique and
the values of a specific array
must always be greater than zero.
Database management systems handle
low level data management operations,
help organization of the data
using a data model, and
provide an open programmable
access to data.
We covered a number of data models.
We showed four models that were
discussed in more details.
The relational data to date
is the most used data model.
Here, data is structured like tables
which are formally called relations.
The relational data model has been
implemented in traditional database
systems.
But they are being refreshly implemented
in modern data systems over Hadoop and
Spark and
are getting deployed on cloud platforms.
The second category of data gaining
popularity is semi-structured data,
which includes documents like HTML pages,
XML data and
JSON data that are used by
many Internet applications.
This data can have one element nested or
embedded within another data element and
hence can often be modeled as a tree.
The third category of data
models is called graph data.
A graph is a network where
nodes represent entities and
edges represent relationships
between pairs of such entities.
For example, in a social network,
nodes may represent users and
edges may represent their friendship.
The operations performed on graph data
includes traversing the network so
that one can find friend of
a friend of a friend if needed.
In contrast to the previous three models,
that there is a structure to the data,
the text data is much more unstructured
because an entire data item
like a new article can
be just a text string.
However, text is the primary form of data
in information retrieval systems or
search engines like Google.
We also discussed streaming data,
or data with velocity, as a special
class of data that continually come
to the system at some data rate.
Examples can be found in data coming
from road sensors that measure traffic
patterns or stock price data from
the stock exchange that may come
in volumes from stock
exchanges all over the world.
Streaming data is special because a stream
is technically an infinite data source.
And therefore,
we keep filling up memory and
storage and will eventually go
beyond the capacity of any system.
Streaming data, therefore, needs
a different kind of management system.
For this reason,
streaming data is processed in memory,
in chunks which are also called windows.
Often only the necessary
part of the data stream or
the results of queries against
the data stream is stored.
A typical type of query against streaming
data are alerts or notifications.
The system notices an event like multiple
stock price changing within a short time.
Streaming data is also used for
prediction.
For instance, based on wind direction and
temperature data streams,
one can predict how a wildfire
is going to spread.
In the last course, we also covered
a number of data systems that we called
big data management systems.
These systems use
different data models and
have different capabilities, but
are characterized by some common features.
They are also designed from the start for
parallel and distributed processing.
Most of them implement data partition
parallelism, which, if you can recall,
refers to the process of segmenting
the data into multiple machines so
data retrieval and manipulations can be
performed in parallel on these machines.
Many of these systems allow a large
number of users who constantly update and
query the system.
Some of the systems do not maintain
transaction consistency with every update.
That means,
not all the machines may have all
the updates guaranteed at every moment.
However, most of them provide
a guarantee of eventual consistency,
which means all the machines will
get all updates sooner or later.
Therefore, providing better accuracy and
time.
The third common characteristic
of big data management systems is
that they are often built on top of
a Hadoop-like platform that provides
automatic replication and
a map-reduce style processing ability.
Some of the data operations performed
within these systems make use of these
lower level capabilities.
After this refresher on data modeling and
management, let's start big data
integration and processing.